---
layout: book
title: "Neuromancer"
author: "William Gibson"
rating: "4"
date_read: "2019-12-20"
---

I was inspired to re-read _Neuromancer_ after reading this [absolutely bonkers
profile](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/12/16/how-william-gibson-keeps-his-science-fiction-real)
of Gibson in the _New Yorker_ a few weeks ago. I was reading it while this
[series about
surveillance](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/12/19/opinion/location-tracking-cell-phone.html)
that I helped work on came out, which made me think about the incongruities
between the cyberpunk world imagined by Gibson here and by Neil Stephenson in
_Snow Crash_.

Gibson anticipates this complete collapse of privacy: the story in _Neuromancer_
kicks off when Molly is easily able to find Case. They retreat into a back room
in the "Sprawl" to discuss Armitage in the room with the best privacy that she
can afford.

There are ways, though, in which the worlds of _Neuromancer_ and _Snow Crash_
are very different from where we find ourselves now. Aside from the obvious
dystopian elements, I think the biggest differences are in the ways that
cyberspace manifests itself. For both Gibson and Stephenson, both writing long
before the real rise of the World Wide Web, entering cyberspace is a physical
and visceral experience. Case "jacks into the matrix" through a "cranial jack."
Hiro Protagnoist's digital realm is avatar-centric, in the model that would
eventually be realized in games like Second Life. In both of these cases, the
act of going online involves a physical separation between the operator and
their physical "meat space." In _Neuromancer_, Case physically jacks in and
attaches 'trodes' to himself and surfs around the ice, which is represented by
colorful blocks in a separate world.

In the real world, though, this infrastructure is much more banal. Our phones
are constantly pinging servers, cell towers, Bluetooth beacons, and WiFi
routers, but we never see or sense that. We don't jack into the Matrix or attach
electrodes to our faces to go online. With the possible exception of some fully
immersive VR, we maintain our normal senses. It's impossible for us to know that
things are being lost or taken from us when we go online. Even the downsides
that are outlined in these pieces about private surveillance are physically
removed from us: how can we understand ourselves as rows in a database table?
All of these systems are completely hidden from us; we can't see or understand
their effects. In the world of _Neuromancer_, Case experiences brain-death a
handful of times: there are real risks associated with being a console cowboy:
the AI Wintermute fries his brain to the point of death.

This is a major point raised by the piece: why is it legal for companies to
collect this data? Why are there no laws regulating them or protecting people?
I think a large part of it is this gap between these worlds that were imagined
from 20 years ago and how they ended up panning out. Though the internet truly
has penetrated into every corner of life (see, for example this [tremendously
reported
piece](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/30/business/amazon-baltimore.html) about
all the ways Amazon is a part of daily life in Baltimore), we don't really feel
or understand it in the same way that we might if things were closer to the
worlds of _Neuromancer_ or _Snow Crash_.

In any case _Neuromancer_ is a fun book, and still applicable to our world
despite its differences. I'm looking forward to reading Gibson's newest series
after reading that profile of him, and seeing how he has shaped the world around
us still.
